[SECTION] General onsite/permit application

The following information must be found on the appropriate application form and be signed by the appropriate partied (owner or agent). 

[HEADER] Project information: 
.	building or unit number work
.	the estimated value of the project
.	proposed 
.	area of works (size of the property)
.	municipal zoning (zoning by-law) roll number 

[HEADER] Owners responsibility - the legal owner of the property
.	A letter of authorization required if an agent engaged
.	legal owner of the property information
.	must be completed if the applicant is anyone other than the legal owner.
.	type of permit you are applied for. 

Declaration of the Applicant: 
.	If the person signing the application is someone other than the legal owner, the applicant must have a letter of authorization completed and signed by the legal owner to be submitted with the application.

[HEADER] Permit Attachments

Designer Information 
Schedule 1: must be filled out by the designer of the project. Installers must fill out Schedule 1 A,B,C, D and provide BCIN number. Homeowners who are designing their own system are exempt from registration and qualification requirements of the Building Code. 

Installer Information 
Schedule 2: must be filled out
.	Project information
.	Registered installer information
.	Qualified supervisor information
.	Declaration of applicant

[HEADER] Construction of a sewage system

1.3.5.4. Construction of Sewage Systems
(1)  	The following information is prescribed for the purposes of subsection 15.12 (3) of 	the Act and must be provided to the chief building official before the 	commencement of the construction of a sewage system:
(a)	the information described in Sentence 3.3.4.1.(2) as it relates to,
(i)	the person registered under Article 3.3.3.2., and
(ii)	the person with the qualifications described in Clause 3.3.3.2.(1)(a) who will 	supervise construction on-site of the sewage system, and
(b)	the name and telephone number of the representative of the person described in 	Subclause (a)(i) who may be contacted by the chief building official in respect of 	the construction of the sewage system.


1.3.1.2. Applications for Permits under Section 8 of the Act
(1)  	An application for a permit under section 8 of the Act to construct or demolish a 	building shall be made by,
	(a) the owner of the property on which the proposed construction or demolition is 	to take place, or
	(b) the authorized agent of the owner referred to in Clause (a).
(2) 	An application referred to in Sentence (1) shall be in a form approved by the 	Minister.

