[SECTION] Review of Onsite Wastewater Definitions

[Sub header] A Review of Onsite Wastewater
An onsite wastewater treatment system is a method of collecting and treating the wastewater produced by a building or a small group of buildings on the same lot or neighbouring properties. 

These systems are used in areas that do not have access to municipal sewer systems. The property may or may not be connected to city drinking water, a well, or may obtain water from a lake or river. 

Some onsite wastewater treatment uses a series of natural and sometimes mechanical processes to treat the wastewater and safely return it into the environment.

The Ontario Building Code governs onsite systems that service a building or buildings that are contained on the same lot as the onsite system. 

These systems are design to treat and dispose to a maximum of 10,000 litres per day. 

In Ontario systems designed to handle more than 10,000 litres per day or systems servicing more than one lot are systems governed by the Ministry of Environment under the Ontario Water Resources Act.


[Sub header] Characteristics of Sewage
Sewage can be divided into blackwater and greywater. Blackwater refers to human wastes (toilets and urinals) and greywater is wastewater from household activities that include laundry, washing dishes, preparing foods, cleaning, showers and other similar activities. 

Both contain contaminants of concern and must be treated as sewage. Non-residential systems (i.e.. restaurants and other commercial uses) present further considerations that must be addressed in the system design and site assessment.

Understanding the characteristics of sewage and water flow are an essential part of success in the onsite wastewater treatment industry.


[Sub header] Key Constituents
Wastewater or sewage is made up of a number of components that determine how a system is designed and once in place, how it operates. Each of the main constituents in wastewater can be measured, and acceptable levels maintained to ensure the safety of health and the environment.


[Sub header] Organic Material
Organic material, in terms of wastewater treatment, is the biodegradable solid material found in sewage. For example, human excrement contains digested and partially digested food, such as the asparagus you ate for dinner last night and the bacon you had for breakfast.

Since it is this organic material that feeds the bacteria necessary for the treatment of wastewater and which contribute to biomat formation, planning for the amount of organic material in the wastewater is critical to the proper operation of an onsite system.

The amount of organic material, known as organic load or mass load, in the wastewater is normally written as biochemical (biological) oxygen demand or BOD.

The results of the British “Royal Commission on River Pollution” (1865) and the “Royal Commission on Sewage Disposal” (1898) led to the selection of BOD as the “definitive test for organic pollution of rivers.” After 100 years, these British concepts are still used around the world.


[Sub header] Aerobic vs. Anaerobic
Aerobic bacteria live and multiply in the presence of free oxygen. Facultative bacteria always achieve an aerobic state when oxygen is present. 

While the name “aerobic” implies breathing air, dissolved oxygen is the primary source of energy for aerobic bacteria. The metabolism of aerobes is much higher than for anaerobes. 

The increase of aerobes means that 90% fewer organisms are needed compared to the anaerobic process, or that treatment is accomplished in 90% less time. This provides a number of advantages including a higher percentage of organic removal. The by-products of aerobic bacteria are carbon dioxide and water. 

Aerobic bacteria live in colonial structures called floc and are kept in suspension by the mechanical action used to introduce oxygen into the wastewater. This mechanical action exposes the floc to the organic material while treatment takes place. 

Following digestion, a gravity clarifier separates and settles out the floc. Because of the mechanical nature of the aerobic digestion process, maintenance and operator oversight are required.


[Sub header] Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD): A commonly used gross measurement of the concentration of biodegradable organic impurities in wastewater. 

BOD is established through a laboratory test of the oxygen consumed by a sample of the wastewater over a 5 day incubation period and the test is therefore more accurately written as “BOD5”. The reason 5 days was chosen is that it takes approximately 5 days for water to travel from its source to an estuary in the United Kingdom.

The BOD5 test gives a measure of the amount of biodegradable organic matter present in the sample. It is written in milligrams per litre, mg/L (which is equivalent to parts per million (ppm)).

The amount of oxygen, expressed in milligrams per litre (mg/L), required by bacteria while stabilizing, digesting, or treating organic matter under aerobic conditions is determined by the availability of material in the wastewater to be used as biological food and the amount of oxygen used by the microorganisms during oxidation. 

Normally BOD5 is used, being the BOD over a 5 day incubation period. cBOD is a measure of the carbonaceous BOD, obtained by using a chemical inhibitor to block nitrification. nBOD is a measure of the nitrogenous BOD, obtained by performing a cBOD test first. uBOD is ultimate uBOD, the oxygen required to complete the oxidation, synthesis and endogenous respiration in a sample of wastewater.

BOD is reduced in the wastewater by settlement, for example in a septic tank, and by bacterial digestion.

[NC Image 1 BOD levels for water]

Another test associated with aerobic digestion by bacteria is the chemical oxygen demand (COD) test. It is a quick test used to determine how much oxygen is needed to oxidize the wastewater using dichromate acid in solution.

BOD5 is normally:
•	0.3 to 0.8 X the COD for sewage;
•	0.4 to 0.6 X the COD for Primary effluent; and
•	0.1 to 0.3 X the COD for secondary effluent.


[Sub Header] Suspended Solids
Suspended solids are a term used to describe tiny particles of solid material floating in the wastewater. These small indefinitely suspended particles include non-biodegradable particles which contribute to plugging of soils in an onsite system. It is for that reason care is taken to remove as much as possible.

Suspended solids are treated by settlement and filtration. Grinder pumps and sewage pumps break the solids in wastewater into smaller pieces which creates a higher number of suspended solids.

The concentration of total suspended solids (TSS) is the weight, written as mg/L, of the dried solids retained on a filter of a specific size, divided by the volume of the sample from which the solids were collected.


[Sub header] Dissolved Solids
Dissolved solids are tiny particles similar to suspended solids only smaller. They are defined as solid material that can pass through a 2 micrometer sieve, while suspended solids cannot. They are written as Total Dissolved Solids (TDS) in mg/L.


[Sub header] Strength of Wastewater
Together, BOD and TSS are used to define the “strength” of the sewage or effluent. The higher the numbers, the more solid the materials. The more solid material, the higher the strength.


[Sub header] Primary Treatment
Primary treatment is normally a settlement and floatation process as in a septic tank and can include a screening process such as an effluent filter. Some solids are anaerobically broken down but dissolved contaminants are not significantly removed.

Domestic Residential Raw Sewage is typically defined as having a BOD5 and a TSS of about 100 - 400 mg/L each.

A septic tank sized for a two day retention time with effluent filter should be able to provide effluent with TSS removal of between 75% and 80% with figures around 20 to 60 mc/L (ppm) and BOD removal of between 35% and 35% with figures of 100 to 150 mg/L (ppm).


[Sub header] Secondary Treatment
Secondary is defined as an aerobic based treatment device or process that achieves an effluent quality at discharge of:

BOD5 < 40 mg/L
TSS< 30 mg/L 


[Sub header] Tertiary Treatment
Tertiary treatment is the advanced treatment of wastewater that goes beyond secondary, removing most of the BOD, TSS and pathogens and may also reduce nutrients such as phosphorous and nitrogen. 


[Sub header] Effluent Quality Verification
Most manufactured pretreatment plants that are sold to produce Secondary or Tertiary effluent should have been subject to testing and verification. This may be by the American National Standards Institute and the National Sanitation Foundation (ANSI/NSF) testing standard, or Bureau de Normalisation du Quebec Canadian BNQ 3680_600.

In addition to the ANSI or BNQ certification most treatment units are required to conduct sampling of installed systems to ensure continued compliance with the certification obtained. 


[Sub header] Monitoring
Secondary and Tertiary systems used in conjunction with shallow buried trenches or BMEC approved leaching beds, are tested for effluent quality on a regular minimum schedule.

Sewage and Primary effluent quality are normally only monitored where a problem is suspected. All systems of this nature must be monitored for flow. 

Access to monitoring information should allow the maintenance provider or designer analyzing the system malfunction, to see flows on a daily or hourly basis. This information is very helpful in determining the cause(s) of a problem failure.


[Sub header] pH
pH is a measure of acidity or alkalinity. It provides a measure on a scale from 0 to 14 of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution with 7 being neutral. Numbers greater than 7 indi¬cate the material is more alkaline and less than 7 is more acidic. 

Sewage normally has a pH of 6–8.5, effluent of 7.1–8.3. It is desirable to keep effluent pH in the range 6–8.5 as outside this range it is difficult to use biological treatment.